CASSANDRA-18554 Adding Mutual Tls authenticators for client & internode connections (#2372)
apache/cassandra: doc/modules/cassandra/pages/getting-started/mtlsauthenticators.adoc

= Getting started with mTLS authenticators

When a certificate based authentication protocol like TLS is used for client and
Internode connections, `MutualTlsAuthenticator` & `MutualTlsInternodeAuthenticator`
can be used for the authentication by leveraging the client certificates from the
SSL handshake.

After SSL handshake, identity from the client certificates is extracted and only
authorized users will be granted access.

== What is an Identity

One can define their own identity for certificates by extracting some fields or
information from the certificates. one can implement the interface `MutualTlsCertificateValidator`
to provide logic for validating & extracting identity from the certificates.

There is a default implementation of `MutualTlsCertificateValidator` with
https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spiffe-about/spiffe-concepts/[SPIFFE] as the identity

> of the certifactes.This requires spiffe to be present in the SAN of the certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the certificates.This requires spiffe to be present in the SAN of the certificate.
```

[source, plaintext]
----
internode_authenticator:
  class_name : org.apache.cassandra.auth.MutualTlsInternodeAuthenticator
  parameters :
    validator_class_name: org.apache.cassandra.auth.SpiffeCertificateValidator
----

*STEP 3: Bounce the cluster*
Once the cluster is bounced all internode communications will be authenticated by mTLS
authenticator. Note that if new nodes join the ring a bounce is not required.

== Migration from existing password based authentication
* For client connections, since the migration will not happen overnight,
the operators can run cassandra in optional mTLS mode and use
`MutualTlsWithPasswordFallbackAuthenticator` which will accept both mTLS & password
based connections, based on the type of connection client is making. These settings
can be configured in `cassandra.yaml`. Once all the clients migrate to using mTLS,
turn off optional mode and set the authenticator to be `MutualTlsAuthenticator`. From
that point only mTLS client connections will be accepted.

* For Internode connections, while doing rolling upgrades from non-mTLS based configuration
to mTLS based configuration, use optional mode for the new nodes to be able to connect to

> old nodes which are still using non-mTLS based configuation during upgrade. After this, change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
old nodes which are still using non-mTLS based configuration during upgrade. After this, change
```

= Getting started with mTLS authenticators

When a certificate based authentication protocol like TLS is used for client and
Internode connections, `MutualTlsAuthenticator` & `MutualTlsInternodeAuthenticator`
can be used for the authentication by leveraging the client certificates from the
SSL handshake.

After SSL handshake, identity from the client certificates is extracted and only
authorized users will be granted access.

== What is an Identity

> One can define their own identity for certificates by extracting some fields or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operators can define their own identity for certificates by extracting some fields or
```

> information from the certificates. one can implement the interface `MutualTlsCertificateValidator`
> to provide logic for validating & extracting identity from the certificates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information from the certificates. Implementing the interface `MutualTlsCertificateValidator`
supports validating & extracting identity from the certificates that can be used by `MutualTlsAuthenticator` and `MutualTlsInternodeAuthenticator` to customize for the certificate conventions used in the deployment environment.
```

There is a default implementation of `MutualTlsCertificateValidator` with
https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spiffe-about/spiffe-concepts/[SPIFFE] as the identity
of the certificates.This requires spiffe to be present in the SAN of the certificate.

> One can implement their own validator that suits their needs.

Reviewer 2: I'd just drop the `One can implement`...sentence as you already covered above.

> For example, instead of using `SPIFFE` based validator a `CN` based validator can be
> implemented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of using `SPIFFE` based validator a `CN` based validator could by an operator-supplied custom class that implements `MutualTlsCertificateValidator`.
```

== Configuring mTLS authenticator for client connections

Note that the following steps uses SPIFFE identity as an example, If you are using
a custom validator, use appropriate identity in place of `spiffe://testdomain.com/testIdentifier/testValue`.

*STEP 1: Add authorized users to system_auth.identity_to_roles table*

Note that only users with permissions to create/modify roles can add/remove identities.
Client certificates with the identities in this table will be trusted by C*.
[source, plaintext]
----
ADD IDENTITY 'spiffe://testdomain.com/testIdentifier/testValue' TO ROLE 'read_only_user'
----

*STEP 2: Configure Cassandra.yaml with right properties*

`client_encryption_options` configuration for mTLS connections
[source, plaintext]
----
client_encryption_options:
  enabled: true
  optional: false
  keystore: conf/.keystore
  keystore_password: cassandra
  truststore: conf/.truststore
  truststore_password: cassandra

>   require_client_auth: false // to enable mTLS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  require_client_auth: false // while migrating to mTLS, keep permitting non-validated certs
```

Author: This setting is not for client certificate validation. It is for allowing only TLS connections. Do you mean to say that we have to use optional mode while migrating to mTLS?

`internode_authenticator.parameters.trusted_peer_identities` if configured.

Otherwise, it trusts connections which have the same identity as the node.
When a node is making an outbound connection to another node, it uses the
certificate configured in `server_encryption_options.outbound_keystore`.
During the start of the node, identity is extracted from the outbound keystore and
connections from other nodes who have the same identity will be trusted if
`trusted_peer_identities` is not configured.

For example, if a node has `testIdentity` embedded in the certificate in
outbound keystore, It trusts connections from other nodes when their certificates
have `testIdentity` embedded in them.

There is an optional configuration `node_identity` that can be used to verify identity
extracted from the keystore to avoid any configuration errors.

*STEP 1: Configure server_encryption_options in cassandra.yaml*

[source, plaintext]
----
server_encryption_options:
  internode_encryption: all
  optional: true
  keystore: conf/.keystore
  keystore_password: cassandra
  outbound_keystore: conf/.outbound_keystore
  outbound_keystore_password: cassandra

>   require_client_auth: true  // for enabling mTLS

Reviewer 2: I think we force this true for internode connections, so not sure if this setting really matters

Author: If the authenticator is not mTLS authenticator, then `require_client_auth: false` should be the configuration. In case of internode mtls authentication, we need to explicitly set this to be true.

Reviewer 2: I was just thinking of this code... https://github.com/apache/cassandra/blob/trunk/src/java/org/apache/cassandra/security/SSLFactory.java#L190

  truststore: conf/.truststore
  truststore_password: cassandra
----

*STEP 2: Configure Internode Authenticator and Validator*

Configure mTLS Internode authenticator and validator. If you are
implementing a custom validator, use that instead of Spiffe validator
[source, plaintext]
----
internode_authenticator:
  class_name : org.apache.cassandra.auth.MutualTlsInternodeAuthenticator
  parameters :
    validator_class_name: org.apache.cassandra.auth.SpiffeCertificateValidator
    trusted_peer_identities : "spiffe1,spiffe2"
----

*STEP 3: Bounce the cluster*

> Once the cluster is bounced all internode communications will be authenticated by mTLS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once all nodes in the cluster are restarted, all internode communications will be authenticated by mTLS
```

might be nice to say it a different way - bounce is a bit of an idiom so may be helpful to spell it out.

authenticator.

== Migration from existing password based authentication
* For client connections, since the migration will not happen overnight,
the operators can run cassandra in optional mTLS mode and use
`MutualTlsWithPasswordFallbackAuthenticator` which will accept both mTLS & password
based connections, based on the type of connection client is making. These settings
can be configured in `cassandra.yaml`. Once all the clients migrate to using mTLS,
turn off optional mode and set the authenticator to be `MutualTlsAuthenticator`. From
that point only mTLS client connections will be accepted.

* For Internode connections, while doing rolling upgrades from non-mTLS based configuration

> to mTLS based configuration, use optional mode for the new nodes to be able to connect to

Reviewer 2: use optional mode - it would be good to be more specific with how to set optional mode. An operator could think  you mean set `optional: true` in encryption settings which could weaken settings during a migration, rather than set the authenticator to `MutualTlsWithPasswordFallbackAuthenticator`

== Configuring mTLS authenticator for Internode connections

Internode authenticator trusts certificates whose identities are present in
`internode_authenticator.parameters.trusted_peer_identities` if configured.

> Otherwise, it trusts conections which have the same identity as the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, it trusts connections which have the same identity as the node.
```
